---
title: 'Chromatiblock: scalable whole-genome visualization of structural differences in prokaryotes'
tags:
  - Python
  - Bioinformatics
  - Microbial genomics
  - Visualization
  - multiple alignment
authors:
  - name: Mitchell John Sullivan
    orcid: 0000-0003-0872-7098
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Harm van Bakel^
    ocid: 0000-0002-1376-6916
    affiliation: 1
affiliations:
 - name: Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn Institute for Data Science and Genomic Technology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, United States of America
   index: 1
date: 22 June 2020
bibliography: paper.bib

---

# Summary

# Summary
Chromatiblock is a Python application for visualizing the presence, absence and ar-rangement of syntenic blocks across large numbers of complete bacterial genomes.

# Availability

Chromatiblock is freely available under a GPL license, for macOS, GNU/Linux and and Microsoft Windows from https://github.com/mjsull/chromatiblock/


# Introduction 

Visualizing structural variation between complete prokaryotic genomes is
important for identifying the genetic basis of strain differences. This is
generally accomplished by displaying the results of serial pairwise comparisons
or multiple alignments in linear or circular layouts. Serial pairwise
comparisons can be created using tools such as Easyfig [@RN1] or  GenoplotR [@RN2]
that display linear pairwise comparisons between two or more genomes. However, 
genomic loss, gain and structural variation can only be directly inferred for
genomes adjacent to each other. Multiple alignment visualization tools such as
Mauve [@RN3] and GenomeRing [@RN4] solve this issue by representing syntenic
regions as blocks and using lines to connect blocks across genomes or to
indicate block order, respectively. In large figures this can result in
crisscrossing lines that are often difficult to interpret. Alternatively, ring
plots, such as those created by the BLAST ring image generator (BRIG) [@RN5] or
the CGView Comparison Tool (CCT) [@RN6] use a series of concentric circles to
display the presence or absence of genomic regions across multiple genomes.
These regions are ordered according to a reference, and as such they convey
no information about their arrangement in each non-reference genome.
Alternatively, Circos [@RN7] plots show genomes around the outside edge of a
circle and represents regions of similarity as arcs, but this approach scales
poorly as the number of arcs increases exponentially with each genome.
Representing many genomes as circles can also result in large size differences
between inner and outer rings, further complicating interpretation. Here we
present Chomatiblock, an application for visualizing syntenic blocks in
multiple genome alignments. Chromatiblock was designed to create a linear
visual representation of structural variation, including the presence and
absence of genomic regions in an easy-to-comprehend and scalable manner, adding
to the visualization options available for alignments of large numbers of
complete genomes.

# Implementation

Chromatiblock is a Python script available under a GPL license and runs on
macOS, GNU/Linux and Microsoft Windows operating systems. Chromatiblock can be
used to create publication-quality images displaying arrangement and presence of
syntenic blocks. The results can also be viewed as an interactive webpage that
allows the user to zoom, pan and highlight shared regions across genomes.
Chromatiblock takes an extended multi-fasta alignment (MAF) file as input, which
can be generated by a variety of multi-genome alignment programs (Angiuoli and
Salzberg, 2011; Minkin and Medvedev, 2019). Alternatively, when provided with
FASTA-formatted files for a set of genomes of interest, Chromatiblock can run
Sibelia (Minkin, et al., 2013) to automatically generate the syntenic blocks
required for input. Once syntenic blocks have been identified in the MAF file,
Chromatiblock will generate a dual-panel layout consisting of a global alignment
view and a detailed view of regions that differ between genomes. The global
alignment view shows the arrangement of core blocks (i.e. syntenic regions found
once in all genomes) in the alignment and how non-core blocks (i.e found in 2 or
more genomes) and unique sequences (i.e. found in a single genome) are arranged
relative to the core blocks. Core blocks are aligned according to their
arrangement in the first genome. The color of the core blocks for each genome is
determined by its position. Between any two adjacent core blocks there exists a
combination of non-core blocks and unique sequence. This combination is grouped
and positioned between the two core blocks to which they are adjacent. In
instances where the group cannot be placed between its two adjacent core blocks
it is placed arbitrarily next to one of the core blocks to which it is
adjacent. This is indicated by removing the gap between core and non-core
blocks. An example of a global alignment of 28 complete C. difficile genomes is
shown in Fig. 1A. A large inversion can be observed in the third isolate from
the top, indicated by a difference in ordering of core block colors relative to
the reference. Plasmids, found in 9 genomes, consist entirely of non-core and
unique blocks. They are positioned on the right side of the figure. The presence
or absence of specific user-provided gene sequences can also be indicated by
distinct gene symbols and are automatically annotated using BLASTx. In the
example, six isolates contain a transposon carrying the erm(B) gene, encoding a
23S rRNA methyltransferase that confers resistance to erythromycin. The
erm(B)gene is also present in an ST54 isolate but located on a novel transposon
and inserted elsewhere in the genome (Fig. 1A).  The alignment difference view
shows the presence and absence of all non-core blocks. Chromatiblock can use
BLAST+ to categorize and color each non-core block based on a user-provided
reference database of nucleotide or amino acid FASTA files. Categories can also
be assigned based on the size of the contig in which the non-core block is
found. The example in Fig 1B shows that the main C. difficile pathogenicity
locus (PaLoc) that contains the genes encoding the TcdA enterotoxin and TcdB
cytotoxin, has been lost in the ST100 isolate. Plasmids carried by C. difficile
are very chimeric, with large regions being shared, but with only the two MLST8
isolates carrying identical plasmids. In conclusion, Chromatiblock allows users
to quickly and easily create publication-quality figures showing structural
changes and genetic diversity at the whole genome level.


[Figure 1: Chromatiblock visualization of 28 Clostridium difficile genomes.
Multi-locus sequence type (MLST) of each isolate is indicated on the left. Top)
Global alignment view. Core blocks across genomes (rows) are visualized as
vertically aligned solid rectangles that are colored according to their position
in the genome. Non-core blocks are visualized as patterned rectangles, with each
block represented by a unique combination of pattern and color. Finally,
sequences unique to a single genome are depicted as solid black lines.  Bottom)
Alignment difference view. Each genome is represented as a row and each non-core
block is assigned a column in the order they are most commonly found in the
genome. Presence of each non-core block is shown as a patterned rectangle in the
genomes row. As non-core blocks may be present more than once, duplicates are
shown by splitting the blocks according to repeat number.](chromatiblock_figure.png)

# Funding

This work was supported by a grant from the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAD R01 AI119145).

Conflict of Interest: none declared.

# References
paper.bib
